well we're joined now from Rafa by Scott
Anderson the senior deputy director of
Gaza operations for the United Nations
relief and works Agency for eroa um it's
great that we have you on this hour
we're trying to understand as much as we
can about this morning's events what can
you add um to your understanding about
what
happened unfortunately not much more
than it's already been reported what we
can conf confirm is that there were no
un Vehicles involved in the
Convoy um and then we've heard the death
toll but I think what this speaks to is
the general situation in the north the
deterioration of Law and Order and the
security environment but most
importantly it speaks to the desperation
of people and we know there are pockets
of starvation in the north we've had
reports from hospitals of children died
of malnutrition and I think today's
event just really underscores the
desperation people feel north of waza as
they try to find food for their families
it's extremely difficult as we know and
as we've reported to get food to
Northern Gaza the world food program
just last week said they're not doing it
anymore because it's not safe enough is
unoa still in a position and still able
to deliver make Aid deliveries to
Northern
Gaza um we are currently not delivering
much like the world food program due to
the prevailing security environment uh
we last attempted to delivery February
8th we were unfortunately unable to
complete that delivery and for the UN as
a whole has been very difficult since
2024 since 1 of January we've only got
93 trucks of Aid North of waza which I
think we can all agree for 300,000
people that are still living there is
not enough aid for them to sustain
themselves and again has led us to the
situation where people are desperate and
desperate to find food for them and
their families and can you give us a
little bit of context on the security
circumstances is the safety conditions
for the trucks that are still conducting
those meager deliveries into Northern
Gaza yeah I I think the the situation is
very difficult um I mean in addition to
the security environment being difficult
the road networks are difficult and just
the situation overall is very dire um
and I think you know the commissioner
General said it best when will this all
end uh which we can all say we hope ass
soon
um but there aren't any police working
any blue police um which continues to
degrade the security situation and leads
really to lawlessness and events like
that happen today so what we would
really need is to have a functioning
police force to try to reestablish some
Law and Order which would make a
delivery of aid for the UN and others
much easier to the north as well as to
the rest of
Gaza question that may illuminate what
happened this morning would it be
typical uh as was apparently the case
this morning would it be typical for
Israeli forces to be in the vicinity of
an aid
delivery um well not necessarily an aid
delivery I think the location where this
happened is near the checkpoint from the
south of Gaza to the North near theadi
and certainly it would be normal for
Israeli forces to be near the checkpoint
but without knowing the exact location
of what happened I can't speak to more
than that okay um the I I would like to
put to you what essentially has been
Israel's explanation of what happened
this morning they're saying well
essentially there was a crowd there was
uh people died in a crush a St a
stampede of sorts um and we therefore
Israel is not directly responsible for
this uh for most of the Palestinian
deaths this morning is that uh something
that you can speak to I mean The Wider
context of the level of desperation that
Palestinians have have when they do get
that trickle of Aid coming
in I me like I I I don't think any of us
can speak to intent or what happened if
we weren't there but as I said before
what we can speak to is that it's a very
desperate situation north of waza there
are still 300,000 people living there
trying their very best take care of
themselves and their families but you
have a very desperate situation with
pockets of starvation
and when people are that desperate it
will lead to tragic events like happened
this morning where we had significant
loss of life significant injuries and
what we need to do is get Aid to the
north somehow at scale which you know
hopefully we can get another Crossing
opens we can enter the north from the
north and that would allow the UN and
others to move things in at scale and
begin to address the pockets of
starvation the malnutrition and the
other challenges that we Face Scott
Anderson senior deputy director of Gaza
operations for unoa thank you very much
for for joining us this
hour Israel has seized nearly 3 square
kilm of Palestinian land near an illegal
settlement in the occupied West Bank the
move will establish a new settlement
near Mal adumim near occupied East
Jerusalem an estimated 40,000 Israeli
settlers live there settler expansion is
illegal under international law yet it
has ramped up significantly since the
war on Gaza began in
October let's bring back Bernard Smith
who's standing by in occupied East
Jerusalem uh Bernard why is Israel
taking this
land so all settlements are illegal
under international law but Israel
distinguishes between settlements and
what it calls illegal outposts last
summer 10 illegal outposts by the
cabinet were approved to me become full
settlements and the first of those has
now been signed off by uh the Israeli
military now the time timing of this is
fascinating because only on Monday we
were in the ha wrapping up six days of
hearings where almost 50 countries had
argued before the international court of
justice that Israel's occupation of the
West Bank should be declared illegal
because continuous rampant ex excessive
or continuing settlement construction
and Israeli settlement in the occupied
West Bank was preventing the
Palestinians from uh uh from
self-determination and creating a
Palestinian state they've seen directly
the Israelis um ignoring really
International uh calls uh un calls to
stop settlements the US was given the
the thankless task of Defending Israel's
occupation in front of the court saying
this should be left to the UN and the
Israelis and the Palestinians to
negotiate directly well there again we
have evidence today the Israelis
ignoring un calls not to increase
settlement construction and the pal
saying look this is why we have to go to
the icj because Israel just keeps
ignoring calls to stop it settlement
construction yeah Bon Smith reporting
from occupied East Jerusalem thank you
Bernard Israel says that two Israeli
settlers and one Palestinian gunman have
been killed in a shooting at a petrol
station in the occupied West Bank the
incident took place at the entrance uh
to the Ilie illegal settlement that's
north of rala Israeli media says the
Army has blocked off roads in the area
as they search for possible additional
Shooters let's bring in Zay basravi Zayn
you're in rala in the occupied West Bank
tell us more about this shooting what do
you
know well we heard about this about 3
hours ago at about 5:33 p.m. local time
uh a Palestinian man seemingly in his
20s or 30s armed with what appears to be
an automatic assault rifle possibly an
American M16 according to the videos
that we've seen he arrived at that gas
station at Ellie opened fire killed
killed two Israelis another Israeli
gunman at the scene then shot and killed
this Palestinian man it's not the first
time an incident like this has taken
place at the specific gas station June
last year in a similar attack four
Israelis were killed the two Palestinian
gunmen involved were also killed one at
the scene one later on uh down the road
near tubas now uh there was another
incident earlier today in which a
Palestinian man was killed two others
injured when uh during this incident
west of Hebron according to locals uh
witnessing the incident there these men
were trying to cross a barrier either to
get to work or to collect wild herbs for
food and were shot for being at that
place on that
land and of course when shootings like
this occur the story never ends there
what are you looking up for next what do
you think happens from
now well we've already seen settlers
take to social media calling for
retaliation saying they should not not
be silent Palestinian communities are
expecting uh uh some kind of retaliation
some kind of response some of the areas
uh uh between ramala and Nablus where
Palestinians drive back and forth
there's already been settler attacks on
at least three vehicles there uh cities
in North of romala around romala uh
places like sjar turmos Aya the M
municipalities there have started to
open their doors to uh Palestinians to
afraid to travel by road back home or
people stuck in limbo in between places
because of road closures because of
settler attacks so we're already seeing
Palestinians being stranded because of
those roadblocks as the Israeli forces
continue to carry out manhunts and
locals have also spotted military uh
cars vehicles moving towards kandia
refugee camp south of ramala where the
shooter in the involved in the attack at
Elliot was thought to have come from now
whenever incidents like this happen
Palestinians say Collective punishment
is always part of the problem the
shooters family and friends are
identified detained questioned harassed
often times the family home is marked
for demolition so the expectation is
that it will be a potentially busy and a
busy night in the colia refugee camp for
the residents there Zay mravi reporting
from romala thank you very
much